QUATERNIONS AND THE ALGEBRA OF VECTORS.

J. Willard Gibbs, Ph.D, LL.D.

[Nature, vol. XLVII. pp. 463, 464, Mar. 16,1893.]

[ASCII editor's note: '[nabla]' stands for the usual inverted capital
delta sign of vector calculus.]

In a recent number of Nature [vol. xlvii, p. 151], Mr. McAulay puts
certain questions to Mr. Heaviside and to me, relating to a subject of
such importance as to justify an answer somewhat at length.  I cannot
of course speak for Mr. Heaviside, although I suppose that his views
are not very different from mine on the most essential points, but
even if he shall have already replied before this letter can appear, I
shall be glad to add whatever of force may belong to independent
testimony.

Mr. McAulay asks: ``What is the first duty of the physical vector
analyst qua physical vector analyst?''  The answer is not doubtful.
It is to present the subject in such a form as to be most easily
acquired, and most useful when acquired.

In regard to the slow progress of such methods towards recognition and
use by physicists and others, which Mr. McAulay deplores, it does not
seem possible to impute it to any want of uniformity of notation.  I
doubt whether there is any modern branch of mathematics which has been
presented for so long a time with a greater uniformity of notation
than quaternions.

What, then, is the cause of the fact which Mr. McAulay and all of us
deplore?  It is not far to seek.  We need only a glance at the volumes
in which Hamilton set forth his method.  No wonder that physicists and
others failed to perceive the possibilities of simplicity,
perspicuity, and brevity which were contained in a system presented to
them in ponderous volumes of 800 pages.  Perhaps Hamilton may have
intended these volumes as a sort of thesaurus, and we should look to
his shorter papers for a compact account of his method.  But if we
turn to his earlier papers on Quaternions in the Philosophical
Magazine, in which principally he introduced the subject to the notice
of his contemporaries, we find them entitled ``On Quaternions; or on a
New System of Imaginaries in Algebra,'' and in them we find a great
deal about imaginaries, and very little of a vector analysis.  To show
how slowly the system of vector analysis developed itself in the
quaternionic nidus, we need only say that the symbols S, V, and
[nabla] do not appear until two or three years after the discovery of
quaternions.  In short, it seems to have been only a secondary object
with Hamilton to express the geometrical relations of
vectors,--secondary in time, and also secondary in this, that it was
never allowed to give shape to his work.

But this relates to the past.  In regard to the present status, I beg
leave to quote what Mr. McAulay has said on another occasion (see
Phil. Mag., June 1892):--``Quaternions differ in an important respect
from other branches of mathematics that are studied by mathematicians
after they have in the course of years of hard labour laid the
foundation of all their future work.  In nearly all cases these
branches are very properly so called.  They each grow out of a
definite spot of the main tree of mathematics, and derive their
sustenance from the sap of the trunk as a whole.  But not so with
quaternions.  To let these grow in the brain of a mathematician, he
must start from the seed as with the rest of his mathematics regarded
as a whole.  He cannot graft them on his already flourishing tree, for
they will die there.  They are independent plants that require
separate sowing and the consequent careful tending.''

Can we wonder that mathematicians, physicists, astronomers, and
geometers feel some doubt as to the value or necessity of something so
separate from all other branches of learning?  Can that be a natural
treatment of the subject which has no relations to any other method,
and, as one might suppose from reading some treatises, has only
occurred to a single man?  Or, at best, is it not discouraging to be
told that in order to use the quaternionic method, one must give up
the progress which he has already made in the pursuit of his favourite
science, and go back to the beginning and start anew on a parallel
course?

I believe, however, that if what I have quoted is true of vector
methods, it is because there is something fundamentally wrong in the
presentation of the subject.  Of course, in some sense and to some
extent it is and must be true.  Whatever is special, accidental, and
individual, will die, as it should; but that which is universal and
essential should remain as an organic part of the whole intellectual
acquisition.  If that which is essential dies with the accidental, it
must be because the accidental has been given the prominence which
belongs to the essential.  For myself, I should preach no such
doctrine to those whom I wish to convert to the true faith.

In Italy, they say, all roads lead to Rome.  In mechanics, kinematics,
astronomy, physics, all study leads to the consideration of certain
relations and operations.  These are the capital notions; these should
have the leading parts in any analysis suited to the subject.

If I wished to attract the student of any of these sciences are to an
algebra for vectors, I should tell him that the fundamental notions of
this algebra were exactly those with which he was daily conversant.  I
should tell him that a vector algebra is so far from being any one
man's production that half a century ago several were already working
toward an algebra which should be primarily geometrical and not
arithmetical, and that there is a remarkable similarity in the results
to which these efforts led (see Proc. A.A.A.S. for 1886, pp. 37, ff.)
[this vol. p. 91, ff.].  I should call his attention to the fact that
Lagrange and Gauss used the notation (abc) to denote precisely the
same as Hamilton by his S(abc), except that Lagrange limited the
expression to unit vectors, and Gauss to vectors of which the length
is the secant of the latitude, and I should show him that we have only
to give up these limitations, and the expression (in connection with
the notion of geometrical addition) is endowed with an immense wealth
of transformations.  I should call his attention to the fact that the
notation [r_1 r_2], universal in the theory of orbits, is identical
with Hamilton's V(p_1 p_2), except that Hamilton takes the area as a
vector, i.e., includes the notion of the direction of the normal to
the plane of the triangle, and that with this simple modification (and
with the notion of geometrical addition of surfaces as well as of
lines) this expression becomes closely connected with the
first-mentioned, and is not only endowed with a similar capability for
transformation, but enriches the first with new capabilities.  In
fact, I should tell him that the notions which we use in vector
analysis are those which he who reads between the lines will meet on
every page of the great masters of analysis, or of those who have
probed deepest the secrets of nature, the only difference being that
the vector analyst, having regard to the weakness of the human
intellect, does as the early painters who wrote beneath their pictures
``This is a tree,'' ``This is a horse.''

I cannot attach quite so much importance as Mr. McAulay to uniformity
of notation.  That very uniformity, if it existed among those who use
a vector analysis, would rather obscure than reveal their connection
with the general course of modern thought in mathematics and physics.
There are two ways in which we may measure the progress of any reform.
The one consists in counting those who have adopted the shibboleth of
the reformers; the other measure is the degree in which the community
is imbued with the essential principles of the reform.  I should apply
the broader measure to the present case, and do not find it quite so
bad as Mr. McAulay does.

Yet the question of notations, although not the vital question, is
certainly important, and I assure Mr. McAulay that reluctance to make
unnecessary innovations in notation has been a very powerful motive in
restraining me from publication.  Indeed my pamphlet on Vector
Analysis, which has excited the animadversion of quaternionists, was
never formally published, although rather widely distributed, so long
as I had copies to distribute, among those who I thought might be
interested in the subject.  I may say, however, since I am called upon
to defend my position, that I have found the notations of that
pamphlet more flexible than those generally used.  Mr. McAulay, at
least, will understand what I mean by this, if I say that some of the
relations which he has thought of sufficient importance to express by
means of special devices (see Proc. R.S.E.  for 1890-91), may be
expressed at least as briefly in the notations which I have used, and
without special devices.  But I should not have been satisfied for the
purposes of my pamphlet with any notation which should suggest even to
the careless reader any connection with the notion of the quaternion.
For I confess that one of my objects was to show that a system of
vector analysis does not require any support from the notion of the
quaternion, or, I may add, of the imaginary in algebra.

I should hardly dare to express myself with so much freedom, if I
could not shelter myself behind an authority which will not be
questioned.

I do not see that I have done anything very different from what the
eminent mathematician upon whom Hamilton's mantle has fallen has been
doing, it would seem, unconsciously.  Contrast the system of
quaternions, which he has described in his sketch of Hamilton's life
and work in the North British Review for September, 1866, with the
system which he urges upon the attention of physicists in the
Philosophical Magazine in 1890.  In 1866 we have a great deal about
imaginaries, and nearly as much about the quaternion.  In 1890 we have
nothing about imaginaries, and little about the quaternion.  Prof.
Tait has spoken of the calculus of quaternions as throwing off in the
course of years its early Cartesian trammels.  I wonder that he does
not see how well the progress in which he has led may be described as
throwing off the yoke of the quaternion.  A characteristic example is
seen in the use of the symbol [nabla].  Hamilton applies this to a
vector to form a quaternion, Tait to form a linear vector function.
But while breathing a new life into the formulae of quaternions, Prof.
Tait stands stoutly by the letter.

Now I appreciate and admire the generous loyalty toward one whom he
regards as his master, which has always led Prof. Tait to minimise the
originality of his own work in regard to quaternions, and write as if
everything was contained in the ideas which flashed into the mind of
Hamilton at the classic Brougham Bridge.  But not to speak of other
claims of historical justice, we owe duties to our scholars as well as
to our teachers, and the world is too large, and the current of modern
thought is too broad, to be confined by the ipse dixit even of a
Hamilton.
